Tracy Kidder’s The Soul of a New Machine (1981) is a nonfiction account of a team of underdog engineers who build a state-of-the-art minicomputer despite tremendous odds. Led by a cold, demanding boss and faced with severe budget and manpower constraints, the engineers work under grueling conditions to deliver a machine that outperforms the computing products made by bigger and better-funded competitors. The team’s model for success would influence countless upstarts in Silicon Valley, for better or worse. Meanwhile, Kidder’s characterization of computer engineers as bold and passionate visionaries transcended the era’s prevailing clichés about “tech geeks” and forever transformed the way society views the computing industry.

When the book begins in the late 1970s, Data General is one of a small group of firms fighting for a share of the burgeoning “minicomputer” industry. About the size of a closet and costing up to $25,000 apiece, minicomputers are precursors to the desktop PCs that would dominate the 1990s. A small but significant player in the industry, Data General begins to see its sales plummet after longtime market leader DEC releases the state-of-the-art 32-bit VAX computer. Desperate to build its own 32-bit machine and spurred on by a tax dispute with the state government, Data General relocates most of its operation from Westborough, Massachusetts to a new facility in North Carolina. Known internally as the Fountainhead Project, this new department becomes ground zero for Data General’s single-minded efforts to take down the VAX, consuming the majority of the firm’s resources, attention, and talent.

Meanwhile, back at its Massachusetts office, a small group of employees who refuse to uproot their families are tasked with maintaining Data General’s existing products. The senior member of this skeleton crew is a designer named Tom West, whose prickly demeanor befits his role as leader of the slighted, angry engineers left behind. Not content to coast along while the rest of Data General works to save the company, West—with the scarcest of resources at his disposal—decides to lead his own project, codenamed Eagle, aimed at dethroning DEC’s VAX. Though he characterizes the gambit to his boss as a backup plan in case the Fountainhead Project fails, West is confident he can improve upon the VAX’s design and establish a new industry standard.





If revolutionizing the computing industry is difficult on its own, doing so with minimal support proves to be a harrowing effort fraught with tremendous challenges. Confined to a drab, suffocating basement, the Eagle team’s makeshift facility gets as hot as an oven when the company forgets or declines to pay for air conditioning. West only pays his engineers a pittance compared to what they could earn elsewhere; nor can he pay them overtime, even though he frequently demands twenty-hour days and seven-day workweeks. Facing oppressive work conditions and enormous odds, West recruits a group of young recent graduates—chosen, he claims, because “they didn’t know yet what was impossible.”

The Eagle team is separated into two divisions: “Hardy Boys,” in charge of hardware, and “Micro Kids,” who handle the microchip software commands. They thrive in the face of West’s highly unorthodox style, a volatile cocktail of fear, bombast, and belittlement. West’s approach, though potentially alienating, leaves no room for non-believers, thereby inspiring cult-like devotion to his cause. The obsessive atmosphere is helped along by a concept West calls “Signing Up,” which requires all team members to forgo family, friends, and other commitments that distract from building the perfect machine. To help cement the team’s single-minded focus, West tells his engineers they are the company’s last hope, while the rest of the company views their work as Plan B at best.

Having established both obsession and isolation, West introduces his most powerful motivators: fear and paranoia. Kidder calls this Mushroom Management: “Keep them in the dark, feed them shit, and watch them grow.” West works to keep the progress of each computing component a secret, so at any given time he can spring unrealistic deadlines on engineers, perpetuating the kind of anxiety West believes is necessary for great work.





Although West’s tactics seem cruel, Kidder frequently reminds the reader that it’s all done in service of greater goals. When West walks through the main floor of the facility as if the hardworking foot soldiers don’t even exist, it’s not because he’s a standoffish jerk, Kidder theorizes; it’s that he hopes to position himself as a villain or scapegoat so if the project fails, the engineers will blame West instead of themselves. And when Kidder describes West’s tendency to induce unnecessary anxiety in his engineers by exaggerating the urgency and importance of their work, he doesn’t frame West as a taskmaster. Rather, he’s depicted as someone who understands that one of the most powerful motivators—absent salary hikes or promotions, which West can’t offer anyway—is personal responsibility.

This emphasis on individual responsibility makes each engineer feel like the hero of the story. Unfortunately, and through no fault of West’s, this backfires when the Fountainhead Project misses its deadline and the Eagle becomes Data General’s last chance to save itself. When the Eagle is completed, despite performing ten percent faster than the VAX, West’s engineers aren’t treated as heroes by the rest of the company. Instead, the Fountainhead Project feels betrayed by the Eagle team for stealing its glory. That sense of betrayal lingers toward the Eagle division, which in turn feels that the company isn’t sufficiently grateful for its accomplishments.

The final indignity is that, throughout the Eagle project, West tells his engineers that the reward for their hard work won’t be money, but the chance to “play again,”—a metaphor for pinball. Yet many of the Eagle’s principal figures—who, in Kidder’s estimation, really are responsible for saving the company—don’t even get that chance.


Plot
The book opens with a turf war between two computer design groups within Data General Corporation, a minicomputer vendor in the 1970s. Most of the senior designers are assigned the "sexy" job of designing the next-generation machine in North Carolina. Their project, code-named "Fountainhead", is to give Data General a machine to compete with the VAX computer from Digital Equipment Corporation (DEC), which is starting to take over the new 32-bit minicomputer market. Meanwhile, at the corporate headquarters at Westborough, Massachusetts, the few remaining senior designers there are assigned the much more humble job of improving Data General's existing products. Tom West, the leader of the Westborough designers, starts a skunkworks project. Code-named "Eagle", it becomes a backup plan in case Fountainhead fails, and then the company's only hope in catching up with DEC. In order to complete the project on time, West takes risks: he elects to use new technology, and he relies on new college graduates (who have never designed anything so complex) as the bulk of his design team. The book follows many of the designers as they give almost every waking moment of their lives to design and debug the new machine.[3][5]

Themes
The work environment described in the book is in many ways opposite of traditional management. Instead of top-down management, many of the innovations are started at the grassroots level. Instead of management having to coerce labor to work harder, labor volunteers to complete the project on time. The reason for this is that people will give their best when the work itself is challenging and rewarding. Many of the engineers state that "they don't work for the money", meaning they work for the challenge of inventing and creating. The motivational system is akin to the game of pinball, the analogy being that if you win this round, you get to play the game again; that is, build the next generation of computers.

A running theme in the book is the tension between engineering quality and time to market: the engineers, challenged to bring a minicomputer to market on a very short time-frame, are encouraged to cut corners on design. Tom West describes his motto as "Not everything worth doing is worth doing well," or "If you can do a quick-and-dirty job and it works, do it."[6]: p. 119 

The engineers, in turn, complain that the team's goal is to "put a bag on the side of the Eclipse"[6]: p. 68  – in other words, to turn out an inferior product in order to have it completed more quickly.

Tom West practices the "Mushroom Theory of Management" – "keeping them in the dark, feeding them shit, and watch them grow." That is, isolating the design team from outside influences and, instead, using the fear of the unknown to motivate the team.

The "Soul" of the new machine comes from the dedicated engineers who bring it to life with their endless hours of attention and toil. The soul is theirs, stored in silicon and microcode


The legacy of The Soul of a New Machine has little to do with any one product or engineer. Its legacy is in how Kidder, years before Steve Jobs and Elon Musk became cultural icons, elevates computer engineering into the realm of high drama and heroic struggle, depicting what was long considered a boring and nerdy pursuit as something sublime. In a twenty-year retrospective, WIRED’s Evan Ratliff describes the book’s impact: “The engineer as artist, scientist, visionary; the computer builder as protagonist, even celebrity—these cultural figures came into being in Kidder's Soul and provided a new framework for understanding the progress of the industry.”

The Soul of a New Machine by Tracy Kidder is about Data General Corporation and the development of their first 32-bit Eagle computer. Data General was started by four young men. Edison de Castro, who became the president of Data General, two other engineers from Digital Equipment Corporation and a fourth person named Herb Richman. The company, which began its days in a former beauty shop, has its headquarters in Westborough, Massachusetts in a building known as 14A/B or Webo. Once founded the company grew by leaps and bounds, holding its own again IBM, Sperry Univac and others.

The story of what about thirty whiz kids, known as Microkids and Hardy Boys along with a few of their managers did was almost unbelievable. They invented and designed a 16-bit compatible 32-bit computer in a little over a year with a radically new design that was more than competitive in a young computer market. This book is the story of the exciting journey that these young engineers embarked on when they went to work on the Eagle Eclipse project. Their manager Tom West relayed the specification from their company president Ed de Castro that there be no bit mode and that the new machine must be compatible with the 16-bit Eagle, meaning it must be able to use the software from the 16-bit machine. How to do it was up to the team, which is one of the reasons why the young team, many of them right out of college, like working at Data General. Other companies, like IBM, would not have given them the opportunity to play such a major role in a project like the Eagle project did.

This interesting book shows the reader how the Eagle came into being. It shows how the various technical problems were encountered and solved. Since there is so much technology involved in computers, there are many technical terms that are well-explained by Kidder. There is a lot of technological information about how computers function and malfunction. One of the most interesting parts of the book is the debugging process; as the reader watches the various team members encountering one problem after another. Kidder takes the reader through the debugging process step by step, explaining how various problems are diagnosed and fixed.

Data General's unique management process is referred to as mushroom management. Basically, there is very little direction from management. The different groups are left to negotiate their own problems, when problems arise. There is no manager that they can run to make a decision or to make assignments.

This book is exciting reading for anyone who wants to learn about computers or some of the history of the computer industry